the United States is getting sick of
China it's sick of how China is able to
enrich itself at the expense of the
average American by pouring billions of
dollars of lowquality goods into the
country and it's especially sick of how
China has established itself as an
economic Powerhouse at America's expense
creating a multi-billion dollar
importing and exporting mismatch it
thought it had when the Trump
Administration implemented tariffs
against China which the Biden
Administration retained and even
strengthened those tariffs were designed
to stem the flow of Chinese products
into the us while stimulating the
American economy but China found
workarounds it cleverly exploited
loopholes and worked through backdoor
trading channels to circumvent the
tariffs and continue making billions of
dollars from Imports into the US not
anymore the US has finally had enough of
China circumventing its tariffs and
restrictions now it's sending a clear
message to Beijing it's time to get out
of the US in this video we explore the
trade Wars that erupted between the US
and China over the last decade as well
as the clever loopholes China has
exploited to get its goods into America
we'll also look at what the US is doing
to keep China out and what more work
needs to be done for America to finally
take control of its economy on its own
terms we start with the trade Wars China
and the United States have a contentious
trading Arrangement each relies on the
other and neither is especially happy
about it China Mass produces and imports
Goods into America keeping the US
stocked up with items it's not producing
itself or attempting to replace American
Goods with cheaper alternatives the US
sends billions of dollars into China's
coffers in return boosting the economy
of a country that many in the states
view as a geopolitical enemy we can see
just how profitable this relationship
has been to China if we check out the
trade figures between it and the rest of
the world since 2000 in that year China
exported
$23.09 billion of goods an impressive
figure for sure but a number that pales
in comparison to what would come a mere
decade later China has established
itself as a trade monolith president X
Ping's clever focus on turning his
country into the world's manufacturing
Hub resulted in China pulling in a
staggering 1.65 4 trillion dollar in
2010 6 and a half times more than
Beijing earned from its exports in 2000
Milestone after Milestone fell from
there just a year later China cracked
the $2 trillion mark and it hasn't
dropped below that number since by 2021
covid-19 was in full force and China
reaped the benefits with its exports
ballooning to a Preposterous 3554
trillion dollar the simple message to
take away from these numbers is that
China spent the last two decades turning
itself into the world's trading partner
with the US buying more from Beijing
than almost any other nation in 2022
when China pulled in $3.77 trillion from
its exports the US accounted for
536.886260
Rosy relationship China makes the goods
the US purchases them each country
enriches the other in its own way so
what's all of this talk about a trade
War When Donald Trump became US
president he quickly set his sights on
China and its constantly growing exports
Trump accused China of unfair trading
practices a claim that he made
repeatedly while on the campaign Trail
at various points he said China was
taking advantage of the United States
with the influx of Chinese Goods
affecting American workers and
businesses he also accused China of
being a currency manipulator later and
vowed to put an end to China's illegal
export subsidies and lack labor and
environmental standards he said all of
this against the backdrop of the United
States being in a
$65.79 which the US eagerly partook
still the tensions were there and when
Trump became president he set about
enacting a set of measures designed to
make it harder for China to export so
many Goods to the US the tariffs a
tariff is essentially a form of tax
levied against imported goods the idea
is that this tax forces an increase in
the cost of imported goods in the
domestic Market making people less
likely to buy them China sells less as
the tariffs make domestically produced
Goods more appealing to the American
people ultimately the goal is to boost
the American economy by making making
Chinese Goods less affordable allowing
American businesses to compete against
products that were previously sold at
much lower prices Trump went tariff
happy when he became president he
imposed tariffs totaling more than $360
billion against Chinese manufacturers
and retailers within the first three
years of his presidency China responded
of course it implemented its own tariffs
amounting to $110 billion on
American-made products but it was clear
which was the most damaging of the two
with the us being such a massive
customer to China any tax placed on
import Chinese Goods would hit Beijing
in its pocket far harder than China's
tariffs would hit the US Trump
implemented three rounds of tariffs in
2018 with a fourth round following
toward the end of 2019 examples included
the American tariffs placed on musical
instruments and meat both of which were
hit with a 15% Duty during Trump's Reign
don't think for a second that Joe Biden
reduced these tariffs when he came to
power most were maintained with the
Biden Administration even implementing
new tariffs such as raising the Tariff
on electric vehicles from 25% to 100% to
build on what Trump started these
tariffs were nothing new as piie points
out the US collected tariffs on Chinese
Imports during the Clinton Bush and
Obama administrations though it's a far
lower volume these tariffs were also an
indirect swipe at China it's not Beijing
that pays the tax on the goods it
exports it's the Importer receiving
those goods who's then faced with the
difficult decision of absorbing the cost
passing it on to the consumer or simply
no longer selling the product in
question the difference with Trump's
tariffs and Biden's later is the sheer
scale at which they were implemented
importers had practically no choice but
to pass on the higher cost created by
the tariffs again coming back to this
idea of stimulating America's economy by
making Chinese Goods less affordable
after its own tariffs failed to prevent
America's actions China tried to
negotiate it's already pledged to
increase us Imports by $200 billion more
than they were in 2017 closing the ever
widening trade gap between China and
America it's also supposedly taken
action to strengthen domestic
intellectual property laws making it
less likely that counterfeit Chinese
products can enter the American Market
it all adds up to what seems like a
massive win for the United States with
tariffs it gets to claim a much larger
chunk of the money generated by
importing from China than it previously
did it also puts China between a rock
and a hard place Beijing needs the us as
a customer so much that it's willing to
bend over backwards in some respects to
keep it at least this is how the trade
War appears on the surface but China is
nothing if not a crafty economic foe and
it hasn't taken America's tariffs lying
down you may already get a sense of this
if you remember the importing figures we
mentioned earlier us imports from China
increased by 6.3% between 2021 and 22
the trade deficit also increased during
that period it was
382.33 Which is 8.3% higher than it was
in 21 if anything these figures make it
look like the tariffs have the opposite
of their intended effects the question
now is simple how the answer is that
China has managed to to exploit loophole
after loophole to get around America's
tariffs it's taken advantage of the US
and its trade agreements with other
countries to circumvent Duty taxes and
still sell at high volumes it's also
used a rule intended to allow tourists
to ship products to individuals back
home to create massive businesses in a
matter of months in short China found
back doors that when combined with its
legitimate trade to the United States
helped to make the country richer than
it was even before Trump started ramping
up the Tariff pressure we start in
Mexico the BB C recounts the story of a
company named manoir Furniture based in
Monteray which is just 138 Mi away from
Texas by air the business makes plump
leather sofas and reclining armchairs
all carrying the maid in Mexico label
that's good for manoir furniture that
label means it can benefit from the
United States Mexico Canada agreement or
usmca which allows for free trade
between Mexico Canada and the US manir
furniture gets to be part of a massive
free trade zone that encompasses 510
million people and has a 30 97 trillion
economy when measured in nominal gross
domestic product or GDP but here's the
catch manir Furniture isn't a Mexican
company at all it's a Chinese company
built using Chinese money inside Mexico
China has been cleverly taking advantage
of the near Shoring Trend in Mexico in
which businesses hire employees from
other countries to complete work on
their behalf in mano's case that
involves building an entire
manufacturing plant in Mexico and hiring
Mexican workers the company gets to
claim that its products are made in
Mexico when the reality is that the
company wouldn't exist at all if it were
not for Chinese capital manoir is far
from the only Chinese company to use
this little loophole the BBC says that
there are scores of them all setting up
in Mexico both to reduce shipping costs
and to get around the US tariffs placed
on Chinese Goods the company's general
manager uken y highlights how successful
the strategy has been telling the BBC
that we hope to Triple or even quadruple
production here that would be an
impressive level of growth given that m
already has 450 employees in Mexico
we're seeing the impact of Mexico's
openness to near Shoring in its export
figures June 2023 saw the country export
$ 52.9 billion worth of goods which is
an increase of 5.8% on the year before
if companies like manoir follow through
on their expansion plans those numbers
are likely to reach the hundreds of
billions in no time at all of course
China is far from the only entity taking
advantage of this nearshoring trend Elon
Musk is doing the same thing if his
plans to open a Tesla gig Factory
costing $1 billion just outside Monteray
as any indication but with China
Mexico's nearshoring policies are
getting close to creating a major
security risk for the United States
that's according to Enrique dusel of the
center for China Mexico studies at
Mexico's national autonomous University
dusel says Mexico is putting up a big
sign to China saying welcome to Mexico
you don't need a PhD to know that this
isn't going to end well for bilateral
relations between the US and Mexico in
the medium term in other words China
China has found a clever back door for
getting around tariffs but in exploiting
that loophole it's forcing Mexico into
the middle of a trade war in which it
wants no part the US is already trying
to close that back door in several ways
President Biden implements duties on
steel and Mexican products made using
similar metals that were poured or
melted outside North America the idea
there is to ensure China's steel
industry can't get around tariffs by
melting steel before sending it to
Mexico meaning China's steel sector
can't take advantage of the usmca but
it's operating in a gray area as Mary
lovely of the Peterson Institute for
international economics points out just
because you see a Mexican manufacturer
using Chinese inputs does not mean that
they're violating any rules of origin
Mexico is winning big from this
Arrangement container trade from China
to Mexico Rose by 26.2% between January
and July 2024 which followed a 33%
increase in 2023 China is simply
shipping more products be that raw
materials or actual salable Goods into
Mexico than ever before Mexico gets to
boost its export figures thanks to these
Imports bringing more money into the
country and improving its domestic
economy China gets to skirt tariffs and
take advantage of North American free
trade to sell without dealing with Hefty
duties placed on its products perhaps
China's approach is going to trigger
changes to the usmca that remains to be
seen but it's not just Mexico that China
can use to sneak its products into the
United States while avoiding costly
tariffs America's neighbor to the north
Canada isn't immune to the issue now
China isn't able to use Canada in quite
the same way it uses Mexico to get its
products into the United States Canada's
labor costs are far higher than Mexico's
for example meaning it's not
advantageous for Chinese companies to
set up shop in the great white North
it's also worth pointing out that
Canada's Imports of Chinese products
aren't growing as quickly as you might
expect of a country falling victim to
the usmca loophole in 2014 Canada spent
$ 34.14 billion on Chinese products by
2018 which is when most of Trump's
Chinese tariffs came into effect it was
spending 44.1 $3 billion but we've seen
almost consistent increases ever since
the total value of Chinese Imports into
Canada Rose by nearly $10 billion in
2021 compared to 2018 and in 2022 Canada
imported $65.90 billion of Chinese
products a clear record with a number
dropping back down to 56.93 billion in
2023 despite that drop there's a clear
trend of more Chinese products entering
Canada than they were before America put
its tariffs in place many of those
Imports find their way into the United
States
Canadian fulfillment centers are often
used by China as intermediaries one
company in Toronto quickly pivoted to
advertise itself as a China friendly
logistics company when America's tariffs
hit in these cases China isn't building
manufacturing plants itself instead it's
taking advantage of Canada not applying
the same levels of tariffs as the United
States China exports the goods to a
Canadian fulfillment center that Center
then ships the goods onto American
consumers again allowing China to skirt
around tariff restrictions to sell its
products without forcing importers to
eat a massive tax all of this brings us
to another question what is the United
States doing about these trade loopholes
the answer is simple more tariffs only
these tariffs aren't being imposed by
the US America is using its
relationships with Mexico and Canada to
gently push them toward creating harsher
tariffs of their own to close the back
door through which Chinese Goods have
flowed since the US tightened up its own
tariffs we saw this in Mexico in 2024
when the country implemented tariffs
ranging from 5% to 50% on 544 products
that apply to any country with which
Mexico doesn't have a trade agreement
China falls under that umbrella these
tariffs which are temporary cover items
including steel Footwear Plastics
chemicals electronics and textiles
basically every major industry from
which China's manufacturer's profit is a
target like the US Mexico frames these
tariffs as an attempt to reduce its
trade deficit which stood at $ 5.46 3
billion in 2023 but given that the
United States is and remains is Mexico's
most important economic partner trade
between the two countries amounted to $
7456 billion in 2023 it's not hard to
imagine that American pressure is paying
off America wants China's manufacturers
to get out now it's playing a role in
expanding tariffs outside its own
borders to make sure that happens the US
is also directly pushing Mexico to prove
that the products it Imports are truly
made in Mexico that's the purpose of the
steel duties we mentioned earlier Biden
has ensured that any steel imports from
Mexico are subject to a 25% section 232
tariff in all cases when the steel can't
be proven to have been melted or poured
in one of the usmca countries Canada is
taking a similar approach to stem the
flow of Chinese products into the
country Al jazer reports that it's going
to follow America's lead in implementing
a 100% tariff on Chinese electric
vehicle Imports it's also going to place
the same 25% tariff on imported steel
and aluminium reinforcing the notion
that any metal products made in Canada
need to actually be made in the country
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau
says the new tariffs are designed to
counter China's State directed policies
of overcapacity but as we're seeing in
Mexico there's a good chance that
coordination with the United States lies
at the heart of those new tariffs
further Canadian tariffs on Chinese
solar cells and chips may also lie in
the country's future the US wants China
to get out of its manufacturing sector
and it's working alongside Mexico and
Canada to make that happen these new
tariffs this time not of us origin are
designed to do just that but there's a
problem the closing of these back doors
all relate to manufacturing and large
scale Imports of Chinese products like
steel aluminium and electric vehicles
these are products often imported into a
country in deals worth millions of
dollars with the tariffs being designed
to hit China where it hurts economically
however it's not just these major
industrial and Manufacturing sectors
from which China profits with exports
into the US the consumer focused small
Goods sector is as much if not more of a
problem China enriches Itself by selling
small Goods to customers by exploiting
yet another loophole in American law
what's that loophole two words de minies
you may be wondering how Chinese
companies like Teemu and wish are able
to survive in the face of America's
rampant tariffs after all these are
e-commerce companies selling consumer
goods at rock bottom prices you may have
used them yourself to buy products for
cents on the dollar compared to what an
equivalent American product would cost
how is that possible when there are so
many tariffs in place designed to help
America's businesses surely these
e-commerce companies shouldn't be able
to sell such cut priced products because
tariffs would add an import tax to them
except that didn't happen the Dem
Minimus threshold states that any items
imported into the United States that has
a value above $800 is subject to duty
such as the import tax is imposed by
America's tariffs you may have already
seen the problem here any item worth
$800 or less isn't subject to these
duties as long as it's shipped to an
individual which is why companies like
teu and wish are able to succeed they
can skirt around American tariffs by
selling lowcost goods to individual
consumers in low volumes most of these
sales fall under the $800 D Minimus
threshold meaning they're not subject to
tariffs companies like teu make hundreds
of millions of dollars from carrying out
thousands of these lowcost transactions
every day they're still selling in huge
bulk only with the caveat that each sale
is Tiny in comparison to that of an
electric vehicle or steel order the
strategy Works after exploding in
popularity thanks to his viral Marketing
in 2023 teu wounded up hitting Revenue
figures in the multip mple hundreds of
millions by the midpoint of the year in
September 2022 teu had a gross
merchandise volume or gmv of just $3
million that essentially amounts to $3
million in sales made to customers by
May 2023 less than a year later its gmv
had hit $635 million and that's mostly
due to the company's smartly taking
advantage of America's de Minimus laws
teimo is the big company taking
advantage of the D minimis laws there
are many others with the substantial
$800 limit opening up a massive loophole
through which many Chinese manufacturers
and e-commerce retailers are able to
shift products without worrying about
tariffs and this is a fairly recent
loophole up until 2015 the Dem Minimus
threshold was just $200 it being raised
to $800 hasn't just opened the door for
legitimate Chinese companies like Teemu
to skirt tariff laws as reuter points
out that high threshold also makes
possible the Imports of dangerous
substances like fenil or the precursor
chemicals needed to make it into the
United States the situation is so
dangerous that a host of democratic
House of Representative members led by a
trio of lawmakers named Rosa Delo Tom
suoi and Earl blumau pushed President
Biden to close it the urgency of closing
the Dem Minimus loophole cannot be
overstated the trio said in a joint
statement in addition to pointing out
the risks of consumers buying mislabeled
fentanyl laced pills online they
highlighted China and its use of the
threshold de Minimus Imports
particularly from China also evade most
existing trade enforcement mechanisms
including the weager force labor
protection act and section 301 tariffs
used to hold trade sheets accountable
just as it did with near Shoring in
Mexico and working alongside fulfillment
centers in Canada China has found
another clever way to evade America's
tariffs the US may want China to get out
but by leaving so many gaps in its own
law makinging it's essentially inviting
it through the back door so we come to
another question what is the United
States doing to close these loopholes
and finally kick non-tariff Chinese
Imports to the curb we've covered a few
of its actions already working alongside
Mexico and Canada to implement more
tariffs stemming from those countries
instead of the US is a solution on the
manufacturing end of the spectrum those
tariffs will clearly affect the flow of
Steel aluminum and textiles into Mexico
and Canada in the former case companies
like manoir Furniture won't be able to
avoid tariffs by importing materials and
Furniture into the manufacturing site
set up in Mexico they'll still have to
pay giving them pause for thought on
whether it's really worth setting up
shop in usmca countries just to save a
few dollars then there's the action on
the Dem Minimus threshold President
Biden listened to the House of
Representatives lawmakers and
fast-tracked an executive action
designed to provide a temporary solution
to the problem while the ins an outs of
the DI Minimus threshold are argued in
Congress Biden has made a rule excluding
products from the DI Minimus exemptions
if they would otherwise be subject to
tariffs under either of two acts the
1962 trade expansion act or the 1974
trade act it's the latter that's the big
hitter here as the trade act covers
around 40% of All Imports into the
United States including around 70% of
Chinese textile Imports further
regulation is also being discussed
specific actions will be taken against
shipping companies like Teemu and the
Chinese fashion manufacturer Shen that
prevent them from Drop Shipping their
products to a customer's doorstep that's
another way these companies use the Dom
Minimus threshold it applies solely to
products shipped to an individual which
is what these Chinese retailers do
rather than going direct to a doorstep
these packages would have to arrive at
an American port and contain full
information about their contents
importers will also have to file with
the consumer product safety commission
to demonstrate shipping compliance and
argue for the Dom Minimus exemption if
they believe it applies that more
laborious process forces these $800 or
less packages to go through a more
defined Customs route that checks what
they are and if tariffs should apply to
them combine those with stronger tariffs
implemented by Canada and Mexico and you
have the United States creating a volley
of measures all designed with one
purpose reducing China's influence over
American Trade there's one final
question to ask will all of this be
enough Brookings argues that it may not
be or at least America's combination of
leaning on usmca members and closing the
Dom Minimus loopholes are just the first
of many steps it needs to take to get a
better handle on its trade relationship
with China it argues that coordination
is key pointing to China's use of Mexico
and Canada to backdoor products into the
us as a major problem tariffs from both
countries need to be stronger to the
point where they match those implemented
by the us we're seeing evidence of that
starting to come into place with
Canada's electric vehicle tariffs and
Mexico's temporary tariffs on steel
textiles and so on other measures could
include encouraging Mexico to add
inbound investment screening processes
that are unfavorable to China the us
could also take steps to ensure that
electric vehicles of Chinese origin
can't benefit from the 7,500 Ira tax
credit applied to all electric vehicles
made in North America perhaps we'll see
such measures taken in the future for
now the US is sending a clear message to
China it's had enough of the trade
deficit it's had enough of Chinese
products flooding into the US so the US
will continue to strengthen tariffs
while encouraging ing its usmca trading
partners to do the same all while
closing up the Dom Minimus loophole that
has placed so many small American
businesses under threat will these
measures work let us know what you think
in the comments as well as what else you
think the US can do to reduce China's
economic impact on the country should
America offer more incentives to
domestic manufacturers and retailers
could it be even harsher with its
tariffs or similar measures to hit China
where it really hurts economically share
your thoughts below and thank you for
watching the video